---
layout: post
title: "Heads Up!"
image: "img/posts/2016/pencils.jpg"
---

Just a quick post to let you know that the LibreELEC logo branding will change. The current "branch" logo suited at the time of forking because it resonated with team members who type "git branch" on a daily basis; branching and forking have similar meaning to developers.

Since forking the LibreELEC team has absorbed people who are less development focussed and we started to look at how our logo is used. The leafy green shades of the branch look nice on the website masthead but aren't so good in the settings add-on when contrasted against the graphics and backgrounds of the random skins people choose; notably the default 'Estuary' skin in LibreELEC 8.0 (Krypton) which needs a single colour logo.

It became clear we needed an _icon_ logo more than an _image_ logo. We also wanted something that looked professional, i.e. created in less haste and using a proper font, that we could do fun things with similar to how Kodi experiments with its 'K' logo.

In recent weeks the awesome Sam Fisher has been guiding us through the yes, no, no, no, maybe, yes, urgh, no, no, love-it! creative process of coming up with ideas, mock-ups and seeking the collective feedback of a team who aren't shy with opinions. Sam, thank you for your efforts and patience!

In the end the team arrived at something both familiar and different. It will be revealed in LibreELEC 7.0.0 (Jarvis) and in a one-time exception to GitHub commit rules, changes will be merged _after_ we publish 7.0.0 to avoid spoiling the surprise.

LibreELEC team :)

{% include paypal.html %}
